en/news/blog/2022/mclock-vs-wpq-testing-with-background-ops-part2: ad… (#423)
ceph/ceph.io: src/en/news/blog/2022/mclock-vs-wpq-testing-with-background-ops-part2/index.md

---
title: "Comparison of WPQ and mClock Schedulers with Background and Recovery operations with Emphasis on Scrub Operations"
date: "2022-07-19"
author: "Aishwarya Mathuria"
tags:
  - "quincy"
  - "qos"

>   - "mClock"

Reviewer: @amathuria Sridhar had the same compilation issue on his blog post. We found out that it's because all tags need to have lowercase letters!

```suggestion
  - "mclock"
```

Taking a look at the other mClock profiles, we see a slightly bigger drop in average client IOPS. These profiles allocate lower reservations to client operations and the difference is visible in the graph.

These results help us make the inference that average client throughput is higher with the mClock profiles than with WPQ. mClock is able to provide the desired QoS for client operations with background scrub operations running concurrently.

#### Client Latency Comparison

![](images/image2_percentile_latencies_mClock_vs_WPQ.png)

The chart above shows the average completion latency (clat) along with the average 95th, 99th and 99.5th percentiles for the WPQ scheduler and the mClock scheduler profiles.
Overall we can see that the mClock profiles have a lower average completion latency compared to WPQ.
If we look at the high_client_ops profile in particular, the average completion latency is 5.62 msec which is about 3% lower than WPQ.

> To get a better understanding of what the client latencies look like while scrubbing is going on we can refer to the graph below where we can see that high_client_ops has lower latency than WPQ throughout the duration of the test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get a better understanding of what the client latencies look like while scrubbing is going on, we can refer to the graph below where we can see that high_client_ops has lower latency than WPQ throughout the duration of the test
```

![](images/image3_avg_clat_while_scrubbing.png)

#### Scrub Comparison

In this section we will take a look at how scrub performs with the various mClock profiles and WPQ.

> From the initial testing it was evident that WPQ finishes a deep scrub faster than any of the default mClock profiles. After taking a deeper look into what could be contributing to this, we realized that while mClock treats a scheduled scrub and a requested scrub in a similar manner, whereas WPQ does not. The priority given to a [scheduled scrub](https://docs.ceph.com/en/quincy/rados/configuration/osd-config-ref/#confval-osd_scrub_priority) is 5 whereas the priority for a [requested scrub](https://docs.ceph.com/en/quincy/rados/configuration/osd-config-ref/#confval-osd_requested_scrub_priority) is 120! As the test triggers a requested scrub, the difference between WPQ scrub time and mClock scrub time was considerable. In order to continue using the test to compare scheduled deep scrubs , we set the osd_requested_scrub_priority to 5 which is the priority of a scheduled scrub. All tests below use this value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the initial testing, it was evident that WPQ finishes a deep scrub faster than any of the default mClock profiles. After taking a deeper look into what could be contributing to this, we realized that mClock treats a scheduled scrub and a requested scrub in a similar manner, whereas WPQ does not. The priority given to a [scheduled scrub](https://docs.ceph.com/en/quincy/rados/configuration/osd-config-ref/#confval-osd_scrub_priority) is 5, whereas the priority for a [requested scrub](https://docs.ceph.com/en/quincy/rados/configuration/osd-config-ref/#confval-osd_requested_scrub_priority) is 120! As the test triggers a requested scrub, the difference between WPQ scrub time and mClock scrub time was considerable. In order to continue using the test to compare scheduled deep scrubs , we set the osd_requested_scrub_priority to 5, which is the priority of a scheduled scrub. All tests below use this value.
```

| :--------------------: | :---------: | :----: | :---: |
|         client         |      1      |   1    |  80%  |
|  background recovery   |     5%      |   1    | 100%  |
| background best effort |     90%     |   2    |  MAX  |

The graph below shows how the scrub looks over time in comparison to the default mClock profiles and WPQ.

![](images/image7_scrub_rate_over_time_custom_profile_vs_WPQ.png)

![](images/image8_scrub_time_vs_profile_with_custom_profile.png)

From the graphs above we can clearly see that the custom profile is finishing scrub faster than WPQ and the high client profile.
While this proved that mClock parameters can be tuned to give us the desired result, the custom profile is not a reasonable profile option for client and recovery options since they had to be strictly limited and have been given very low reservations.
This led us to explore the existing scrub configuration parameters in Ceph. In the next section we take a look at how these parameters worked with WPQ and how we can tune them to work better with mClock and achieve lower scrub time without compromising client latency and throughput.

#### Experimenting with Scrub Configuration Parameters

> The idea behind this experiment is to find out which existing scrub parameters can be tuned to finish scrub faster and what are their effects on client latency and throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea behind this experiment is to find out which existing scrub parameters can be tuned to finish scrub faster and how they affect client latency and throughput.
```

![](images/image9_scrub_time_with_osd_max_scrubs_modified.png)

The difference in the average throughput can be seen in the graph below.

![](images/image10_IOPS_with_osd_max_scrubs_modified.png)

A comparison between the average client latency of high client profile (osd max scrubs = 10) and WPQ shows us the increase in latency while scrub is in progress.

![](images/image11_avg_clat_while_scrubbing_osd_max_scrubs_modified.png)

The blue dot in the graph above indicates the point at which scrub finished for the high client profile test with max scrubs set to 10.

From the above graphs we can see the effect of the number of concurrent scrubs increasing on the client throughput and latency. If we take a closer look at the numbers, the client throughput (high client profile) has decreased by 6% when compared to WPQ. The average client latency for just the duration of the scrub with the high client profile is about 7 msec. This is a 20% increase from the average client latency of WPQ (5.8 msec). Meanwhile we see a decrease of 44% in the total scrub duration.

> In conclusion, this experiment proves that increasing osd_max_scrubs to reduce scrub duration is a viable option but the user should be careful to not increase the concurrent scrubs to a very high number since this affects the client throughput and latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In conclusion, this experiment proves that increasing osd_max_scrubs to reduce scrub duration is a viable option, but that the user should be careful not to increase the concurrent scrubs to a very high number since this affects the client throughput and latency.
```

##### Reducing scrub cost

> Every operation has a cost associated with it. As discussed in the beginning of this section, the lower the cost of the operation the higher are the chances of it getting dequeued faster. The scrub operations, by default, have a cost of 50MB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every operation has a cost associated with it. As discussed in the beginning of this section, the lower the cost of the operation, the higher are the chances of it getting dequeued faster. The scrub operations, by default, have a cost of 50MB.
```

> WPQ uses a combination of priority and cost to decide which operations are dequeued. Due to this it is easy to control operations such as scrub. For example, the osd_requested_scrub_priority is 120, this means that when a user explicitly asks for a scrub instead of waiting for the scheduled scrub WPQ is able to prioritize scrub operations over client operations (priority of 63). We are looking at the cost parameter with the hope that it could do the same for mClock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WPQ uses a combination of priority and cost to decide which operations are dequeued. Due to this, it is easy to control operations such as scrub. For example, the osd_requested_scrub_priority is 120. This means that when a user explicitly asks for a scrub instead of waiting for the scheduled scrub, WPQ is able to prioritize scrub operations over client operations (priority of 63). We are looking at the cost parameter with the hope that it could do the same for mClock.
```

> For all the mClock tests mentioned below we have reduced the scrub cost to 20MB and for the WPQ tests we have used the default osd_requested_scrub_priority of 120.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For all the mClock tests mentioned below, we have reduced the scrub cost to 20MB. For the WPQ tests, we have used the default osd_requested_scrub_priority of 120.
```

We can see the same in the graphs comparing the average client latency and scrub rate over the test duration where the trends for high recovery profile and WPQ look similar.

![](images/image13_avg_clat_WPQ_vs_highrecovery_modified_cost.png)

![](images/image14_scrub_rate_WPQ_vs_high_recovery_modified_cost.png)

While we see a better scrub performance by mClock profiles, let’s take a look at how the average throughput changes in comparison to WPQ. In the graph below, it is evident that the mClock profiles have better throughput than WPQ. In particular, the high client profile continues to give higher throughput than the other profiles and WPQ.
Decreasing the osd scrub cost has helped the mClock profiles provide scrub performance that is comparable to WPQ’s user requested scrub. And without any loss in client throughput and latency!

![](images/image15_IOPS_with_modified_cost.png)

## Client Ops with Background Scrub & Recovery

### Test Steps

1. Bring up the Ceph cluster with 4 OSDs
2. Create a client RBD pool with replication factor of 3 and prefill some objects into it.
3. Create a RBD recovery pool with replication factor 3.

> 4. Mark an OSD down and out. After the cluster handles the OSD down event, 50K 4MiB objects are pre-filled into the recovery pool.

Reviewer: This made me think of the Simon and Garfunkel song "Bridge over Troubled Water" -- the lyrics go:
"When you're down and out
When you're on the street..."

;)

5. Create a RADOS scrub pool with replication factor 3
6. Temporarily disable recovery and backfill ops.
7. Bring up the downed OSD from step 4
8. Prefill the scrub pool with 100000 objects of 4 MiB size
9. Initiate deep scrub on the scrub pool and enable recovery and backfill at the same time
10. Initiate I/O on the client pool for 9 minutes using fio
11. While the client I/O and deep scrub are running, the test collects statistics related to client throughput and latency. The test also collects scrub statistics such as number of objects scrubbed and scrub duration and recovery statistics.

### Test Results

#### Client Throughput Comparison

![](images/image16_IOPS_mClock_vs_WPQ_recovery_test.png)

> The graph above displays the drop in client throughput with recovery and scrub happening in parallel. All the profiles have a similar drop in throughput and the difference between them is not significant. To get a better understanding, we will compare the client latencies in the next sections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The graph above displays the drop in client throughput with recovery and scrub happening in parallel. All the profiles have a similar drop in throughput, and the difference between them is not significant. To get a better understanding, we will compare the client latencies in the next sections.
```

#### Client Latency Comparison

The graph below describes how average client latency varies for the various profiles over the duration of the test.

![](images/image17_avg_clat_while_scrubbing_and_recovery.png)

There is a jump in client latency for the mClock profiles in the beginning of the test. This can be attributed to the beginning of recovery. As we will see in the next section, recovery rate is much higher for mClock profiles as compared to WPQ.

> Over time this spike flattens out and we can see client latency returning to a normal trend and at times even lower than WPQ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over time, this spike flattens out, and we can see client latency returning to a normal trend-- at times even lower than WPQ.
```

#### Scrub and Recovery Comparison

The graphs below show the scrub and recovery rate over the duration of the test. In the scrub rate comparison, mClock profiles take some time to start scrub whereas with WPQ we can see that scrub starts almost immediately.

![](images/image18_scrub_rate_during_recovery_WPQ_vs_mClock.png)

Almost the opposite trend can be observed in the graph comparing recovery rates. The number of objects recovered starts decreasing rapidly for all the mClock profiles. WPQ seems to have a slow start and eventually takes much longer to complete recovery than the mClock profiles.

![](images/image19_recovery_rate_during_scrub_WPQ_vs_mClock.png)

## Conclusion

> To summarize, after taking a look at how the default mClock profiles handle background operations such as scrubbing and recovery, we can say that mClock profiles attempt to finish recovery faster than a scrub.

Reviewer: Is this a way of saying that mClock profiles attempt to prioritize recovery operations over scrub? I am just a little unclear about what this sentence means.

Author: Thanks! I'll work on rephrasing it

Author: Instead of adding more details to the conclusion, I have added some explanation in the section before. Let me know if that looks better now.

Reviewer: Looks great!

> In addition to this, the experiments with the mClock custom profile proved that with higher allocations we can achieve a faster scrub. Other than mClock parameters, we also explored the existing Ceph configuration parameters that can be tuned to give us better scrub performance with mClock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to this, the experiments with the mClock custom profile proved that with higher allocations, we can achieve a faster scrub. Other than mClock parameters, we also explored the existing Ceph configuration parameters that can be tuned to give us better scrub performance with mClock.
```

> The mClock scheduler is the default osd_op_queue in the Quincy release. Let us know how your experience with mClock goes and thank you for reading!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mClock scheduler is the default osd_op_queue in the Quincy release. Let us know how your experience with mClock goes, and thank you for reading!
```

You can also include a sentence about reaching out to <ceph-users@ceph.io> if anyone has questions.

---

> title: "Comparison of WPQ and mClock Schedulers with Background and Recovery operations with Emphasis on Scrub Operations"

Reviewer: Sridhar's title is "QoS in Quincy: Comparison of mClock and WPQ schedulers with background operations - Part 1", so we can modify this one to match it:
```suggestion
title: "QoS in Quincy: Comparison of mClock and WPQ schedulers with background and recovery operations - Part 2"
```

date: "2022-07-19"
author: "Aishwarya Mathuria"
tags:
  - "quincy"
  - "qos"
  - "mclock"
---

## Introduction

> This blog is a follow up blog to ‘Comparison of WPQ and mClock Schedulers with Background and Recovery operations - Part 1’

Reviewer: Link to Sridhar's blog post when it is merged

| Device Type | Number of OSDs |            RBD Pool Configuration            | Baseline Throughput(@4KiB Random Writes, QD: 64) |
| :---------: | :------------: | :------------------------------------------: | :----------------------------------------------: |

> |  NVMe SSD   |       4        | Replication Factor: 3 / pg_num & pgp_num: 64 |          15007.16965 IOPS (58.6 MiB/s)           |

Reviewer: The formatting looks a little off here (Device Type is right next to Number of OSD). I think Sridhar fixed this in his post by adding a line break.

Taking a look at the other mClock profiles, we see a slightly bigger drop in average client IOPS. These profiles allocate lower reservations to client operations and the difference is visible in the graph.

These results help us make the inference that average client throughput is higher with the mClock profiles than with WPQ. mClock is able to provide the desired QoS for client operations with background scrub operations running concurrently.

#### Client Latency Comparison

![](images/image2_percentile_latencies_mClock_vs_WPQ.png)

The chart above shows the average completion latency (clat) along with the average 95th, 99th and 99.5th percentiles for the WPQ scheduler and the mClock scheduler profiles.
Overall we can see that the mClock profiles have a lower average completion latency compared to WPQ.
If we look at the high_client_ops profile in particular, the average completion latency is 5.62 msec, which is about 3% lower than WPQ.

> To get a better understanding of what the client latencies look like while scrubbing is going on, we can refer to the graph below where we can see that high_client_ops has lower latency than WPQ throughout the duration of the test

Reviewer: Period after "duration of the test"
```suggestion
To get a better understanding of what the client latencies look like while scrubbing is going on, we can refer to the graph below where we can see that high_client_ops has lower latency than WPQ throughout the duration of the test.
```

![](images/image8_scrub_time_vs_profile_with_custom_profile.png)

From the graphs above we can clearly see that the custom profile is finishing scrub faster than WPQ and the high client profile.
While this proved that mClock parameters can be tuned to give us the desired result, the custom profile is not a reasonable profile option for client and recovery options since they had to be strictly limited and have been given very low reservations.
This led us to explore the existing scrub configuration parameters in Ceph. In the next section we take a look at how these parameters worked with WPQ and how we can tune them to work better with mClock and achieve lower scrub time without compromising client latency and throughput.

#### Experimenting with Scrub Configuration Parameters

The idea behind this experiment is to find out which existing scrub parameters can be tuned to finish scrub faster and how they affect client latency and throughput.
In order to achieve lower scrub duration we looked into the following scrub configuration parameters:

1. [osd_max_scrubs](https://docs.ceph.com/en/quincy/rados/configuration/osd-config-ref/#confval-osd_max_scrubs)

> 2. osd_scrub_cost

Reviewer: Maybe put a link for this config option here? https://github.com/ceph/ceph/blob/97d9de3340864c6ae55ba59cd7c8ea31f2a5cda0/src/common/options/global.yaml.in#L3607-L3614

![](images/image18_scrub_rate_during_recovery_WPQ_vs_mClock.png)

Almost the opposite trend can be observed in the graph comparing recovery rates. The number of objects recovered starts decreasing rapidly for all the mClock profiles. WPQ seems to have a slow start and eventually takes much longer to complete recovery than the mClock profiles.

![](images/image19_recovery_rate_during_scrub_WPQ_vs_mClock.png)

The above behavior can be attributed to:

- mClock reserving more IOPS for recovery operations
- Scrub operations having a much higher cost of 50 MiB compared to recovery operations that cost 20 MiB

## Conclusion

To summarize, after taking a look at how the default mClock profiles handle background operations such as scrubbing and recovery, we can say that mClock profiles attempt to finish recovery faster than a scrub.
In addition to this, the experiments with the mClock custom profile proved that with higher allocations, we can achieve a faster scrub. Other than mClock parameters, we also explored the existing Ceph configuration parameters that can be tuned to give us better scrub performance with mClock.

> The mClock scheduler is the default osd_op_queue in the Quincy release. Let us know how your experience with mClock goes, and thank you for reading! For any queries please do reach out to ceph-users@ceph.io

Reviewer: Period after ceph-users@ceph.io
```suggestion
The mClock scheduler is the default osd_op_queue in the Quincy release. Let us know how your experience with mClock goes, and thank you for reading! For any queries please do reach out to ceph-users@ceph.io.
```
